Add native histogram specification (#2539)
prometheus/docs: content/docs/specs/native_histograms.md

---
title: Native Histograms [EXPERIMENTAL]
sort_rank: 6
---

# Native Histograms

Native histograms were introduced as an experimental feature in November 2022.
They are a concept that touches almost every part of the Prometheus stack. The
first version of the Prometheus server supporting native histograms was
v2.40.0. The support had to be enabled via a feature flag
`--enable-feature=native-histograms`. (TODO: This is still the case with the
current release v2.55 and v3.00. Update this section with the stable release,
once it has happened.)

> Due to the pervasive nature of the native-histogram related changes, the

Reviewer: lgtm

might not yet be relevant for released Prometheus versions.)

### Buckets

For standard schemas, buckets are represented as two lists, one for positive
buckets and one for negative buckets. For custom buckets (schema -53), only the
positive bucket list is used, but repurposed for all buckets.

Any unpopulated buckets MAY be excluded from the lists. (Which is the reason
why the buckets are often called _sparse buckets_.)

For float histograms, the elements of the lists are float64 and
represent the bucket population directly.

For integer histograms, the elements of the lists are signed 64-bit integers
(short: int64), and each element represents the bucket population as a delta to
the previous bucket in the list. The first bucket in each list contains an
absolute population (which can also be seen as a delta relative to zero).

To map buckets in the lists to the indices as defined in the previous section,
there are two lists of so-called _spans_, one for the positive buckets and one
for the negative buckets.

Each span consists of a pair of numbers, a signed 32-bit integer (short: int32)
called _offset_ and an unsigned 32-bit integer (short: uint32) called _length_.

> Only the first span in each list can have a negative offset. It defines the

Reviewer: For NHCB not even the first offset can be negative as the offset is interpreted as an offset into the custom values.

overflow bucket is added with an index equal to the length of the custom
values list.

### Exemplars

A native histogram sample can have zero, one, or more exemplars. They work in
the same way as conventional exemplars, but they are organized in a list (as
there can be more than one), and they MUST have a timestamp.

Exemplars exposed as part of a classic histogram MAY be used by native
histograms, if they have a timestamp.

### Special cases of observed values

Instrumented code SHOULD avoid observing values of `NaN` and `±Inf` because
they make limited sense in the context of a histogram. However, those values
MUST still be handled properly, as described in the following.

The sum of observations is calculated as usual by adding the observation to the
sum of observations, following normal floating point arithmetic. (For example,
an observation of `NaN` will set the sum to `NaN`. An observation of `+Inf`
will set the sum to `+Inf`, unless it is already `NaN` or `-Inf`, in which case
the sum is set to `NaN`.)

An observation of `NaN` goes into no bucket, but increments the count of
observations. This implies that the count of observations can be greater than

> the sum of all buckets, and the difference is the number of `NaN` observations.

Reviewer 2: Should it mention that for histograms that haven't had any NaN observations/have a sum of NaN, the count has to be equal to the sum of overall counts in the negative buckets, positive buckets, and zero count?

increments a bucket chosen in the following way:
- With a standard schema, a `+Inf` observation increments the
  _positive overflow bucket_ as described above.
- With a standard schema, a `-Inf` observation increments the
  _negative overflow bucket_ as described above.
- With schema -53 (custom buckets), a `+Inf` observation increments the
  bucket with an index equal to the length of the custom values list.
- With schema -53 (custom buckets), a `-Inf` observation increments the
  bucket with index zero.

### OpenTelemetry interoperability

Prometheus (Prom) native histograms with a standard schema can be
easily mapped into an OpenTelemetry (OTel) exponential histogram and vice
versa, as detailed in the following.

The Prom _schema_ is equal to the _scale_ in OTel, with the restriction that
OTel allows lower values than -4 and higher values than +8. As described above,
Prom has reserved more schema numbers to extend its range, should it ever by
required in practice.

The index is offset by one, i.e. a Prom bucket with index _n_ has index _n-1_
for OTel.

OTel has a dense rather than a sparse representation of buckets. One might see
OTel as “Prom with only one span”.

> The Prom _zero bucket_ is called _zero count_ for OTel, but works the same,

Reviewer 2: I believe the attribute is called ZeroCount in both the Histogram/Float Histogram struct in Prometheus and the OTel Exponential Histogram

  evenly. (This is generally preferred over an exemplar distribution that
  proportionally represents the distribution of observations, as the latter
  will rarely yield exemplars from the long tail of a distribution, which are
  often the most interesting exemplars to look at.)

### OpenMetrics

Currently (2024-11-03), OpenMetrics does not support native histograms.

Adding support to the protobuf version of OpenMetrics is relatively
straightforward due to its similarity to the classic Prometheus protobuf
format. A [proposal in the form of a
PR](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/pull/256) is under review.

Adding support to the text version of OpenMetrics is harder, but also highly
desirable because there are many situations where the generation of protobuf is
infeasible. A text format has to make a trade-off between readability for
humans and efficient handling by machines (encoding, transport, decoding). Work
on it is in progress. See the [design
doc](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/blob/main/proposals/2024-01-29_native_histograms_text_format.md)
for more details.

(TODO: Update section as progress is made.)

> ## Instrumentation libraries

Reviewer: yes please, I think one sentence about not forgetting exemplars would be appreciated

> ## Instrumentation libraries

Author: I even added two paragraphs now, also extending a bit about how instrumentation libraries can track classic and native histograms in parallel and that the API (`Observe(...)`) doesn't change between them.

|                 4             |    -1            |
|                 2             |     0            |
|                 1.5           |     1            |
|                 1.2           |     2            |
|                 1.1           |     3            |
|                 1.05          |     4            |
|                 1.03          |     5            |
|                 1.02          |     6            |
|                 1.01          |     7            |
|                 1.005         |     8            |

### Limiting the bucket count

Buckets of native histograms are created dynamically when they are populated
for the first time. An unexpectedly broad distribution of observed values can
lead to an unexpectedly high number of buckets, requiring more memory than
anticipated. If the distribution of observed values can be manipulated from the
outside, this could even be used as a DoS attack vector via exhausting all the
memory available to the program. Therefore, an instrumentation library SHOULD
offer a bucket limitation strategy. It MAY set one by default, depending on the
typical use cases the library is used for. (TODO: Maybe we should say that a

> strategy SHOULD be set by default. The Go library is currently not limiting the

Reviewer: ack, let's remember this

signifcantly smaller than 100 times the number of buckets in the original
native histogram.)

### NHCB

Currently (2024-11-03), instrumentation libraries offer no way to directly
configure native histograms with custom bucket boundaries (NHCBs). The use case
for NHCBs is to allow native-histogram enabled scrapers to convert classic
histograms to NHCBs upon ingestion (see [next section](#scrape-configuration)).
However, there are valid use cases where custom buckets are desirable directly
during instrumentation. In those cases, the current approach is to instrument
with a classic histogram and configure the scraper to convert it to an NHCB
upon ingestion. However, a more direct treatment of NHCBs in instrumentation
libraries might happen in the future.

## Scrape configuration

To enable the Prometheus server to scrape native histograms, the feature flag
`--enable-feature=native-histograms` is required. This flag also changes the
content negotiation to prefer the classic protobuf-based exposition format over
the OpenMetrics text format. (TODO: This behavior will change once native
histograms are a stable feature.)

### Finetuning content negotiation

> With Prometheus v2.49 and later, it is possible to finetune the scrape protocol

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Prometheus v2.49 and later, it is possible to fine-tune the scrape protocol
```

negotiation globally or per scrape config via the `scrape_protocols` config
setting. It is a list defining the content negotiation priorities. Its default

> value depends on the `--enable-feature=native-histograms` flag. If the flage is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
value depends on the `--enable-feature=native-histograms` flag. If the flag is
```

set, it is `[ PrometheusProto, OpenMetricsText1.0.0, OpenMetricsText0.0.1,
PrometheusText0.0.4 ]`, otherwise `[ OpenMetricsText1.0.0,

> OpenMetricsText0.0.1, PrometheusText0.0.4 ]`. This results in the behavior

Reviewer 3: Should the diff between the lists be explicitly pointed out - i.e. point out the difference is `PrometheusProto`. Just so you don't need to jump between the lists to figure out the change.

the flag set.

The setting can be used to configure protobuf scrapes without ingesting native
histograms or enforce a non-protobuf format for certain targets even with the
`--enable-feature=native-histograms` flag set. As long as the classic
Prometheus protobuf format (`PrometheusProto` in the configured list) is the
only format supporting native histograms, both the feature flag and negotiation
of protobuf is required to actually ingest native histograms.

(TODO: Update this section once native histograms are a stable feature or native
histograms are supported by other formats.)

NOTE: Switching the used exposition format between text-based and
protobuf-based might have surprising effects on the formatting of label values
for `quantile` labels (used in summaries) and `le` labels (used in classic
histograms). This is not a problem for native histograms, but might show up in
the same context because enabling native histograms requires the protobuf
exposition format. See details in the [documentation for the
`native-histograms` feature
flag](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#native-histograms).

> (TODO: Normalization will become the default in v3. Update this as appropriate.)

Author: I have inverted the wording now, so that everything is from the perspective of v3 being the reference point.

### Integer histograms vs. float histograms

The TSDB stores integer histograms and float histograms differently. Generally,
integer histograms are expected to compress better, so a TSDB implementation
MAY store a float histogram as an integer histogram if all bucket counts and
the count of observations have an integer value within the int64 range so that
the conversion to an integer histogram creates a numerically precise
representation of the original float histogram. (Note that the Prometheus TSDB
is not utilizing this option yet.)

### Encoding

Native histograms require two new chunk encodings (Go type `chunkenc.Encoding`)
in the TSDB: `chunkenc.EncHistogram` (string representation `histogram`,
numerical value 2) for integer histograms, and `chunkenc.EncFloatHistogram`
(string representation `floathistogram`, numerical value 3) for float
histograms.

Similarly, there are two new record types for the WAL and the in-memory
snapshot (Go type `record.Type`): `record.HistogramSamples` (string
representation `histogram_samples`, numerical value 7) for integer histograms,
and `record.FloatHistogramSamples` (string representation

> `float_histogram_samples`, numerical value 8) for float histograms.

Reviewer: https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/pull/15467

> `float_histogram_samples`, numerical value 8) for float histograms.

Author: Thank you. I added the new record types.

- The schema, encoded as varbit-int.
- The positive spans, encoded as the number of spans (varbit-uint), followed by
  the length (varbit-uint) and the offset (varbit-int) of each span in a
  repeated sequence.
- The negative spans in the same way.
- Only for schema -53 (NHCB) the custom values, encoded as the number of custom
  values (varbit-uint), followed by the custom values in a repeated sequence,
  using a custom encoding.

The chunk layout is followed by a repeated sequence of sample data. The sample
data is different for integer histograms and float histograms. For an integer
histogram, the data of each sample contains the following:

- The timestamp, encoded as varbit-int, with an absolute value in the 1st
  sample, a delta between the 1st and 2nd sample for the 2nd sample, and a
  “delta of deltas” for any further samples (i.e. the same “double delta”
  encoding used for timestamps in conventional float chunks, just with a
  different bit bucketing for the varbit-int encoding).
- The count of observations, encoded as varbit-uint for the 1st sample and as
  varbit-int for any further samples, using the same “delta of deltas” approach
  as for timestamps.

> - The zero bucket population, enccoded as varbit-uint for the 1st sample and as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The zero bucket population, encoded as varbit-uint for the 1st sample and as
```

- The bucket populations of the negative buckets in the same way.

The sample data of a float histogram has the following differences:

- The count of observations and the zero bucket populations are floats now and
  therefore encoded in the same way as the sum of observations (float64 in the
  1st sample, varbit-xor for any further samples).
- The bucket population are not only floats now, but also absolute population
  counts rather than deltas between buckets. In the 1st sample, all bucket
  populations are represented as plain float64's, while they are encoded as
  varbit-xor for all further samples, XOR'ing corresponding buckets from the
  current and the previous sample.

The following events trigger cutting a new chunk (for the reasons described in
parentheses):

- A change of sample type between integer histogram and float histogram
  (because both require different chunk encodings altogether).
- A change of sample type between gauge histogram and counter histogram
  (because the leading byte has to denote the different type).
- A counter reset for a counter histogram (to be stored in the leading byte as
  counter reset information, see details below).

> - A schema change (which means we need a new chunk layout, and one and the same
>   chunk can only have one chunk layout).

Reviewer 3: (Opinion) I think this reads better:

```suggestion
- A schema change (which means we need a new chunk layout, as a 
  chunk can only have one chunk layout).
```

this case can only happen for gauge histograms (which do not feature counter
resets). The far more common case is that buckets exist in a newly appended
histogram that did not exist in the previously appended histograms. In this
case, these buckets have to be added as explicitly unpopulated buckets to all
previously appended histograms. This requires a complete re-encoding of the
entire chunk. (There is some optimization potential in only re-encoding the
affected parts. Implementing this would be quite complicated. So far, the
performance impact of the full re-encoding did not stick out as problematic.)

### Staleness markers

Staleness markers used to be simply a special float value among the many that
can be used to represent the `NaN` value. The same float value could be used to
mark a histogram time series as stale. However, this would require cutting a
new chunk, just for the purpose of marking the series as stale, because a float
value following a histogram value has to be stored in a different chunk (see
above). Therefore, there is also a histogram version of a stale marker where
the field for the sum of observations is set to the special stale `NaN` value.

> In this case, all other fields are ignored, so they can be set to values

Reviewer 3: Having NaN observations could also result in the sum of observations being NaN according to
https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/2d3624ced474a0eeb70ec9a63d1d4ef7c96283a3/content/docs/specs/native_histograms.md?plain=1#L492-L496

How are the two cases (staleness markers vs NaN observations) distinguished? For the NaN observations case we wouldn't want to ignore the other fields.

Reviewer: I would guess count==0 is the distinguishing feature, so not all fields are ignored

Reviewer 4: There are lots of NaN values; we pick [one of them](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/cd1f8ac129a289be8e7d98b6de57a9ba5814c406/model/value/value.go#L24-L28) to mean "stale".
It is not expected that the same value can be generated by accident.

Author: The count value shouldn't matter. If the sum is the specific bit pattern that defines a staleness marker, the whole histogram must be treated as a staleness marker.

Reviewer: This is super confusing :( Not sure how we can improve the text, but it seems like having `NaN` written here is the source of trouble. Let me suggest something in a new comment to try and clarify.

Author: I'll resolve this conversation, because we have a new one below with @krajorama 's suggestion.

drops from one sample to the next (but see also the [next section about the
created timestamp](#created-timestamp-handling)). The situation is more complex
when detecting a counter reset between two histogram samples.

First of all, gauge histograms and counter histograms are explicitly different
(whereas Prometheus generally treats all float samples equally after ingestion,
no matter if they were ingested as a gauge or a counter metric). Counter resets
do not apply to gauge histograms.

If a gauge histogram is followed by a counter histogram in a time series, a
counter reset is assumed to have happened, because a change from gauge to
counter is considered equivalent to the gauge being deleted and the counter
being newly created from zero.

The most common case is a counter histogram being followed by another counter
histogram. In this case, a possible counter reset is detected by the following
procedure:

If the two histograms differ in schema or in the zero bucket width, these
changes could be part of a compatible resolution reduction (which happens
regularly to [reduce the bucket count of a
histogram](#limit-the-bucket-count)). Both of the following is true for a

> compatible resolution reduction:

Reviewer: on second read it's ok to have here, but I don't see it in the code

> compatible resolution reduction:

Author: It's kind of distributed in various parts of the appender (and the "ok to append" checks) in the tsdb code. I also believe that the current ingestion code doesn't cover all edge cases. I have noted down a TODO on my list to verify and fix that. (The `DetectReset` method MUST result in the exact same counter reset detection as the one we do on the fly during ingestion. The reason why we don't just call `DetectReset` on each ingested histogram is performance.)

- If the schema has changed, its number has decreased from one standard
  exponential schema to another standard schema.
- If the zero bucket width has changed, any populated regular bucket in the first
  histogram is either completely included in the zero bucket of the second
  histogram or not at all (i.e. no partial overlap of old regular buckets with
  the new zero bucket).
  
If any of the conditions are not met, the change is not a compatible resolution
reduction. Because such a change is only possible by resetting or newly 
creating a histogram, it is considered a counter reset and the detection
procedure is concluded.

If both conditions are met, the first histogram has to be converted so that its
schema and zero bucket width matches those of the second histogram. This
happens in the same way as [previously described](#limit-the-bucket-count):
Neighboring buckets are merged to reduce the schema, and regular buckets are
merged with the zero bucket to increase the width of the zero bucket.

> At this point in the procedure, both histograms have the schema and zero bucket

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point in the procedure, both histograms have the same schema and zero bucket
```

- A drop in the population count of any bucket, including the zero bucket. This
  includes the case where a populated bucket disappears, because a
  non-represented bucket is equivalent to a bucket with a population of zero.
- Any change of the custom values. This only applies for schemas that use
  custom values (currently schema -53, i.e. NHCB). (TODO: In principle, there
  could be a concept of compatible bucket changes in NHCBs, too, but such a
  concept is not implemented yet.)

If none of the above is the case, there is no counter reset.

As this whole procedure is relatively involved, the counter reset detection
preferably happens once during ingestion, with the result being persisted for
later use. Counter reset detection during ingestion has to happen anyway
because a counter reset is one of the triggers to cut a new chunk.

Cutting a new chunk after a counter reset aims to improve the compression
ratio. A counter reset sets all bucket populations to zero, so there are fewer
buckets to represent. A chunk, however, has to represent the superset of all
buckets of all histograms in the chunk, so cutting a new chunk enables a
simpler set of buckets for the new chunk.

> This in turn implies that there will never be a counter reset within a chunk.
> The only histogram for which counter reset information has to be persisted is
> therefore the 1st histogram in a chunk. This happens in the so-called

Reviewer 2: I think this phrasing is a little bit confusing. Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
This in turn implies that there will never be a counter reset after the first sample in a chunk. Therefore, the only counter reset information that has to be persisted is is that of the first histogram in the chunk. This happens in the so-called
```

- The `CounterResetHint` of gauge histograms is always `GaugeType`. Any other
  `CounterResetHint` value implies that the histogram in question is a counter
  histogram. In this way, queriers (including the PromQL engine, see
  [below](#promql)) obtain the information if a histogram is a gauge or a
  counter (which is notably different from float samples).
- For counter histogram samples from within a chunk, the `CounterResetHint` is
  set to `NotCounterReset`, because counter resets never happen within a chunk.
  However, overlapping blocks and out-of-order ingestion can break this rule,
  see below.
- For the 1st histogram in a counter histogram chunk, the counter reset
  information from the chunk is generally used as the `CounterResetHint`
  (either `CounterReset`, `NotCounterReset`, or `UnknownCounterReset`).
  However, overlapping blocks and out-of-order ingestion can break this rule,
  see below.
  
TODO: Currently, Prometheus returns a `CounterResetHint` of
`UnknownCounterReset` for the 1st histogram of a chunk marked as
`NotCounterReset` (which is essentially situation (4) from above). Once [this

> issue](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/15247) is resolves, we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
issue](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/15247) is resolved, we
```

and a float or between a histogram and a scalar. If an operater processes such
an impossible combination, the corresponding element is removed from the output
vector and an info-level annotation is added to the result. (This situation is
somewhat similar to label matching, where the sample type plays a role similar
to a label. Therefore, such a mismatch might be known and deliberate, which is
the reason why the level of the annotation is only info.)

The following describes all the operations that actually _do_ work.

Addition (`+`) and subtraction (`-`) work between two histograms. These
operators add or subtract all matching bucket populations and the count and the
sum of observations. Missing buckets are assumed to be empty and treated
accordingly. Subtraction might result in negative histograms, see [notes
above](#unary-minus-and-negative-histograms). Generally, both operands should
be gauges. Adding and subtracting counter histograms requires caution, but
PromQL allows it. Adding a gauge histogram and a counter histogram results in a
gauge histogram. Adding two counter histograms with contradicting counter reset

> hints triggers a warn-level annotation. (TODO: The latter not yet implemented.

Author: I assume the explanation above is satisfactory.

sum and count of observations. Whether the histograms have counter or gauge
flavor is irrelevant for the comparison. (A counter histogram could be equal to
a gauge histogram.)

The logical/set binary operators (`and`, `or`, `unless`) work as expected even
if histogram samples are involved. They only check for the existence of a
vector element and don't change their behavior depending on the sample type of
an element (float or histogram).

The “trim” operators `>/` and `</` were introduced specifically for native
histograms. They only work for a histogram on the left hand side and a float
sample or a scalar on the right hand side. (They do not work for float samples
or scalars on _both_ sides. An info-level annotation is returned in this case.)
These operators remove observations from the histogram that are greater or
smaller than the float value on the right side, respectively, and return the
resulting histogram. The removal is only precise if the threshold coincides
with a bucket boundary. Otherwise, interpolation within the affected buckets
has to be used, as described [above](#interpolation-within-a-bucket). The

> counter vs. gauge flavor of the histogram is preserved. (TODO: These operaters

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
counter vs. gauge flavor of the histogram is preserved. (TODO: These operators
```

explicit counter reset detection in this case. Furthermore, a change from
counter histogram to gauge histogram and vice versa is counted as a reset.
(TODO: Not implemented yet.)

The `histogram_quantile()` function has a very special role as it is the only
function that treats a specific “magic” label specially, namely the `le` label
used by classic histograms. `histogram_quantile()` also works for native
histograms in a similar way, but without the special role of the `le` label.
The function keeps treating float samples in the known way, while it uses the
new “native” way for native histogram samples.

An example for a typical query for classic histograms (including `rate` and
aggregation):

```
histogram_quantile(0.9, sum by (job, le) (rate(http_request_duration_seconds_bucket[10m])))
```

This is the corresponding query for a native histograms:
```
histogram_quantile(0.9, sum by (job) (rate(http_request_duration_seconds[10m])))
```

As with classic histograms, an estimation of the maximum and minimum
observation in a histogram can be performed using 1 and 0, respectively, as the
first parameter of `histogram_quantile`. This estimation is much more useful

> with native histograms, though, not only because of the usually higher

Reviewer: native histograms with standard schemas

resolution of native histograms, but even more so because native histograms
have no upper or lower limit. With a classic histogram, the odds are that the
maximum observation is in the +Inf bucket, so that the estimation simply
returns the upper limit of the last bucket before the +Inf bucket. Similarly,
the minimum observation will often be in the lowest bucket. Native histograms
with standard schemas sustain the same resolution across the whole range of
float64 numbers.

The following functions have been introduced specifically for native
histograms:

- `histogram_avg()`
- `histogram_count()`
- `histogram_fraction()`
- `histogram_sum()`
- `histogram_stddev()`
- `histogram_stdvar()`

All these functions silently ignore float samples as input. Each function
returns a vector of float samples.

`histogram_count()` and `histogram_sum()` return the count of observations or the sum of
observations, respectively, that are contained in a native histogram. As they are normal

> function, their result cannot be used in a range selector. Instead of using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions, their result cannot be used in a range selector. Instead of using
```

only as `request_duration_seconds` (and not `request_duration_seconds_sum`,
`request_duration_seconds_count`, or `request_duration_seconds_bucket`). A
native histogram `request_duration_seconds` will also be represented under this
name. Even in the case where `request_duration_seconds` is ingested as both a
classic and a native histogram, there will be no collision as the metadata
returned is actually the same (most notably the returned `type` will be
`histogram`). In other words, there is currently no way of distinguishing
native from classic histograms via the metadata endpoints alone. An additional
look-up via the `series` endpoint is required. There are no plans to change
this, as the existing metadata endpoints are anyway severely limited (no
historical information, no metadata for metrics created by rules, limited
ability to handle conflicting metadata between different targets). There are
plans, though, to improve metadata handling in Prometheus in general. Those
efforts will also take into account how to support native histograms properly.
(TODO: Update as progress is made.)

## Prometheus UI

This section describes the rendering of histograms by Prometheus's own UI. This

> MAY be used as a guideline for external graphing frontends (like Perses or
> Grafana).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MAY be used as a guideline for third party graphing frontends.
```

native histograms can have a lot of buckets and bucket boundaries tend to have
boundaries with a lot of decimal places, the representation isn't necessarily
very readable. Use native histograms in template expansion judiciously.

Example for the text representation of a float histogram:

```
{count:3493.3, sum:2.349209324e+06, [-22.62741699796952,-16):1000, [-16,-11.31370849898476):123400, [-4,-2.82842712474619):3, [-2.82842712474619,-2):3.1, [-0.01,0.01]:5.5, (0.35355339059327373,0.5]:1, (1,1.414213562373095]:3.3, (1.414213562373095,2]:4.2, (2,2.82842712474619]:0.1}
```

## Remote write & read

The [protobuf specs for remote write &
read](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/main/prompb) were extended
for native histograms as an experimental feature. Receivers not capable of
processing native histograms will simply ignore the newly added fields.
Nevertheless, Prometheus has to be configured to send native histograms via
remote write (by setting the `send_native_histograms` remote write config
setting to true).

In [remote write v2](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec_2_0/),
native histograms are a stable feature.

> TODO: Is there more to say? I'm not a remote write & read specialist. Does

Reviewer: Remote read should work , either it sends chunks or converts the result: https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/fc3d19725d83e13363ce40d56672c6f97e2955e7/storage/remote/codec.go#L155

Remove write works for sure, it's in use.

The one TODO I think is to verify/fix the situation when exemplars of a native histogram are sent in two requests instead of one - we might consider the first batch out-of-order. But it has been a while since I worked on this so not 100% sure it's a problem.

remote read really work?

> TODO: What are the plans to auto-convert classic histograms to NHCBs in

Reviewer: No plan at the moment because we cannot guarantee that the classic histogram came from scrape where we for sure know we have all the buckets present. This is true for both receiving and sending remote write. In fact one of the reason for having NHCB is to avoid scenarios where classic histograms are not consistent (missing/late due to independent series). Therefor currently the only plans are to have NHCB when we know we have all data : scrape - being implemented, receiving OTEL histogram - issue there, expose from instrumentation directly.

remote-write?

## Federation

Federation of native histograms works as expected, provided the federation
scrape uses the protobuf format. A federation via OpenMetrics text format will
be possible, at least in principle, once native histograms are supported in
that format, but federation via protobuf is preferred for efficiency reasons
anyway.

TODO: Clarify state of federation of NHCBs. Update once OM supports NH.

## OTLP

The OTLP receiver built into Prometheus will convert incoming OTel exponential
histograms to Prometheus native histograms utilizing the compatibility
described [above](#opentelemetry-interoperability). The resolution of a
histogram using a schema (“scale” in OTel lingo) greater than 8 will be reduced
to match schema 8. (In the unlikely case that a schema smaller than -4 is used,
the ingestion will fail.)

> TODO: Is the OTLP receiver documented anywhere? Link the documentation here.

Reviewer: + TODO convert to NHCB explicit bucket histograms. https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/15022

Reviewer: @aknuds1  about documentation

   range vector selecting classic histograms will only contain data points in
   the earlier part of the range, and a range vector selecting native histograms will only
   contain data points in the later part of the range).
3. A classic histogram might be tailored to have bucket boundaries precisely at
   the points of interest. Native histograms with a standard schema can have a
   high resolution, but do not allow to set bucket boundaries at arbitrary
   values. In those cases, the user experience with native histograms might
   actually be worse.
   
To address (3), it is of course possible to not migrate the classic histogram
in question and leave things as they are. Another option is to leave the
instrumentation the same but convert classic histograms to NHCBs upon
ingestion. This leverages the increased storage performance of native
histograms, but still requires to address (1) and (2) in the same way as for a
full migration to native histograms (see next paragraphs).

The conservative way of addressing (1) and (2) is to allow a long transition
period, which comes at the cost of collecting and storing classic and native
histograms in parallel for a while.

> The first step is to update the instrumentation to expose classic and native

Reviewer: or start scraping NHCB on top of classic histograms

`histogram_quantile(0.9, rate(rpc_duration_seconds[1d]))`. This query
calculates the 90th percentile latency over the last day. Hoewever, if native
histograms haven't been collected for at least one day, the query will only
cover that shorter period. Thus, the query should only be used once native
histograms have been collected for at least 1d. For a dashboard that displays
the daily 90th percentile latency over the last month, it is tempting to craft
a query that correctly switches from classic to native histograms at the right
moment. While that is in principle possible, it is tricky. If feasible, the
transition period during which classic and native histograms are collected in
parallel, can be quite long to minimize the necessity to implement tricky
switch-overs. For example, once classic and native histograms have been
collected in parallel for a month, any dashboard not looking farther back than
a month can simply be switched over from a classic histogram query to a native
histogram query without any consideration about the right switch-over.

Once there is confidence that all queries have been migrated correctly,

> configure Prometheus to only scrape native histograms (which is the “normal”

Reviewer: or start dropping some metrics with relabel rules to make this incremental

setting). If everything still works, it is time to remove classic histograms
from the instrumentation.

> The Grafana Mimir documentation contains [a detailed migration

Reviewer: thanks!

constitutes a counter reset (see [below](#counter-reset-considerations)), so
this case can only happen for gauge histograms (which do not feature counter
resets). The far more common case is that buckets exist in a newly appended
histogram that did not exist in the previously appended histograms. In this
case, these buckets have to be added as explicitly unpopulated buckets to all
previously appended histograms. This requires a complete re-encoding of the
entire chunk. (There is some optimization potential in only re-encoding the
affected parts. Implementing this would be quite complicated. So far, the
performance impact of the full re-encoding did not stick out as problematic.)

### Staleness markers

Staleness markers used to be simply a special float value among the many that
can be used to represent the `NaN` value. The same float value could be used to
mark a histogram time series as stale. However, this would require cutting a
new chunk, just for the purpose of marking the series as stale, because a float
value following a histogram value has to be stored in a different chunk (see
above). Therefore, there is also a histogram version of a stale marker where

> the field for the sum of observations is set to the special stale `NaN` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the field for the sum of observations is set to the special stale `NaN` value. Note: this special `NaN` value is a float value different to other representations of `NaN`, in particular other `NaN` values that would arise from arithmetic operations, thus it is different from observing a "natural" `NaN` value as described in [Special cases of observed values](#special-cases-of-observed-values).
```

Author: I have tried to explain this in the first sentence of this section (albeit in a more condensed form). The confusion encountered here proves that we need a better explanation. However, I think it should be at the beginning of the section, not in the middle. See what I have done (in the next commit).

Reviewer: thank you

---
title: Native Histograms [EXPERIMENTAL]
sort_rank: 6
---

# Native Histograms

> Native histograms were introduced as an experimental feature in November 2022.

Author: It feels more like 0.1 (or 0.0.1 ;). Once we have addressed all (or at least most of) the TODOs here, and declared NH a stable feature, we might think about versioning. Right now, things are just too much in flux. (There are the git hashes, in any case.)

But I'm not even sure if there should be one version for all of NH. There is the exposition format (with its own versioning), there is RW (with its own versioning), there are chunks (with their own versioning), etc.

> Native histograms were introduced as an experimental feature in November 2022.

Reviewer 5: Perhaps make it 1.0-rc.0 then, like we iterate over PRW 2.0? https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec_2_0/ 🤔

> Native histograms were introduced as an experimental feature in November 2022.

Author: I would argue that version numbers aren't the right thing for this pseudo spec. It's way too large of a surface to version. As said above, we should version formats and protocols, not this entire beast.

(I'm also somewhat hesitant to add this to the "specification" section. It could as well be in the "concepts" section. Not saying I want to change it now, just to stress the point that this is only partially a spec.)

The core idea of native histograms is to treat histograms as first class
citizens in the Prometheus data model. Elevating histograms to a “native”
sample type is the fundamental prerequisite for the key properties listed
below, which explains the choice of the name _native histograms_.

Prior to the introduction of native histograms, all Prometheus sample values
have been 64-bit floating point values (short _float64_ or just _float_). These
floats can directly represent _gauges_ or _counters_. The Prometheus metric
types _summary_ and (the classic version of) _histogram_, as they exist in
exposition formats, are broken down into float components upon ingestion: A
_sum_ and a _count_ component for both types, a number of _quantile_ samples
for a summary and a number of _bucket_ samples for a (classic) histogram.

With native histograms, a new structured sample type is introduced. A single
sample represents the previously known _sum_ and _count_ plus a dynamic set of
buckets. This is not limited to ingestion, but PromQL expressions may also
return the new sample type where previously it was only possible to return
float samples.

Native histograms have the following key properties:

> 1. A sparse bucket representation, allowing (near) zero cost for empty buckets.

Author: Yeah, weird. I'll try with the blank line.

2. Coverage of the full float64 range of values.

> 3. No configuration of bucket boundaries during instrumentation.

Author: True. I'll add a clarifying sentence.

4. Dynamic resolution picked according to simple configuration parameters.
5. Sophisticated exponential bucketing schemas, ensuring mergeability between
   all histograms using those schemas.
6. An efficient data representation for both exposition and storage.

> Compared to the previously existing “classic” histograms, native histograms

Author: will also add a note for clarification.

- [Secret History of Prometheus
  Histograms](https://fosdem.org/2020/schedule/event/histograms/) about the
  classic histograms and why Prometheus kept them for so long.
- [Prometheus Histograms – Past, Present, and
  Future](https://promcon.io/2019-munich/talks/prometheus-histograms-past-present-and-future/)
  is the inaugural talk about the new approach that led to native histograms.
- [Better Histograms for
  Prometheus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HG7uzON-IDM) explains why the
  concepts work out in practice.
- [Native Histograms in
  Prometheus](https://promcon.io/2022-munich/talks/native-histograms-in-prometheus/)
  presents and explains native histograms after the actual implementation.
- [PromQL for Native
  Histograms](https://promcon.io/2022-munich/talks/promql-for-native-histograms/)
  explains the usage of native histograms in PromQL.
- [Prometheus Native Histograms in
  Production](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgINvIK9SYc) provides an analysis
  of performance and resource consumption.
- [Using OpenTelemetry’s Exponential Histograms in
  Prometheus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2_TpDcess8) covers the
  interoperability with the OpenTelemetry.

## Glossary

> - A __native histogram__ is an instance of the new complex sample type

Author: I think a native histogram is a native histogram of any schema. We should rather clarify at other locations (like above) rather than somehow suggesting that an NHCB is not a native histogram. (I tried to do that already, but as you have found, I wasn't entirely consistent.)

> - A __native histogram__ is an instance of the new complex sample type

Reviewer 5: I think we are on the same page then, thanks!

  is sufficiently clear, it is often just called a _histogram_ below.
- A __classic histogram__ is an instance of the older sample type representing
  a histogram with fixed buckets, formerly just called a _histogram_. It exists
  as such in the exposition formats, but is broken into a number of float
  samples upon ingestion into Prometheus.
- __Sparse histogram__ is an older, now deprecated name for _native
  histogram_. This name might still be found occasionally in older
  documentation. __Sparse buckets__ remains a meaningful term for the buckets
  of a native histogram.

## Data model

This section describes the data model of native histograms in general. It
avoids implementation specifics as far as possible. This includes terminology.
For example, a _list_ described in this section will become a _repeated
message_ in a protobuf implementation and (most likely) a _slice_ in a Go
implementation.

### General structure

Similar to a classic histogram, a native histogram has a field for the _count_
of observations and a field for the _sum_ of observations. In addition, it
contains the following components, which are described in detail in dedicated
sections below:

> - A _schema_ to identify the method of determining the boundaries of any given

Author: I wouldn't call it a part of the data model. It is, on the one hand, a result of the way we encode it. On the other hand, it is an implementation detail to not do the expensive counter reset detection too often.

> - A _schema_ to identify the method of determining the boundaries of any given

Reviewer 5: fair, thanks!

  bucket with an index _i_.
- A sparse representation of indexed buckets, mirrored for positive and
  negative observations.
- A _zero bucket_ to count observations close to zero.
- A (possibly empty) list of _custom values_.
- _Exemplars_.

> ### Flavors

Reviewer 5: Perhaps standard schema and non-standard schemas is another dimension worth calling out?

Reviewer 5: fair!

protobuf. In practice, many integers in an integer histogram will fit in 1
byte, and most will fit in 2 bytes, so that the explicit presence of integer
histogram in a protobuf-exposition format results directly in a data size
reduction approaching 8x for histograms with many buckets. This is particularly
relevant as the overwhelming majority of histograms exposed by instrumented
targets are integer histograms.

For similar reasons, the representation of integer histograms in RAM and on
disk is generally more efficient than that of float histograms. This is less
relevant than the benefits in the exposition format, though. For one,
Prometheus uses Gorilla-style XOR encoding for floats, which reduces their
size, albeit not as much as the double-delta encoding used for integers. More
importantly, an implementation could always decide to internally use an integer
representation for histogram fields that are effectively integer values (see
above). (Historical note: Prometheus v1 used exactly this approach to improve
the compression of float samples, and Prometheus v3 might very well adopt this
approach again in the future.)

> In a counter histogram, the total _count_ of observation and the counts in the

Reviewer 5: I would expect this section to tell us what to do for gauge histograms. Are there representable by native histograms? If yes, then how?

Author: The concept of a gauge histogram is not linked to NH. It was explained (and referenced) above. There, it is explicitly said that a NH can have gauge flavor. Not sure what else there is to explain for the representation. (Should we say somewhere that in a gauge histogram, all the counts are gauges? That's kind of the idea of a gauge histogram and not specific to native histograms, so maybe we shouldn't create the impression it is. Note that this whole paragraph here exists because classic histograms were treating _sum_ wrongly from the beginning, and it got finally fixed with NH.)

buckets individually behave like Prometheus counters, i.e. they only go down
upon a counter reset. However, the _sum_ of observation may decrease as a
consequence of the observation of negative values. PromQL implementations MUST
detect counter resets based on the whole histogram (see the [counter reset
considerations section](#counter-reset-considerations) below for details).
(Note that this always has been a problem for the _sum_ component of classic
histograms and summaries, too. The approach so far was to accept that counter
reset detection silently breaks for _sum_ in those cases. Fortunately, negative
observations are a very rare use case for Prometheus histograms and summaries.)

### Schema

The _schema_ is a signed integer value with a size of 8 bits (short: int8). It
defines the way bucket boundaries are calculated. The currently valid values
are -53 and the range between and including -4 and +8. More schemas may be
added in the future. -53 is a schema for so-called _custom bucket boundaries_

> or short _custom buckets_, while the other schema numbers represent the

Reviewer 5: Let's add those names to glossary 🤗

Author: Maybe we can consider extending the glossary to all the new terms introduced by this document. However, there would be a lot. If this was a printed document, it might still be helpful for cross reference, but since this is electronic, the reader will simply search for any term they don't remember. (The few terms in the glossary so far are those that might easily be misunderstood or confused.)

  double   upper_bound            = 2; // Inclusive.
  Exemplar exemplar               = 3;
}

// A BucketSpan defines a number of consecutive buckets in a native
// histogram with their offset. Logically, it would be more
// straightforward to include the bucket counts in the Span. However,
// the protobuf representation is more compact in the way the data is
// structured here (with all the buckets in a single array separate
// from the Spans).
message BucketSpan {
  sint32 offset = 1; // Gap to previous span, or starting point for 1st span (which can be negative).
  uint32 length = 2; // Length of consecutive buckets.
}

// A BucketSpan defines a number of consecutive buckets in a native
// histogram with their offset. Logically, it would be more
// straightforward to include the bucket counts in the Span. However,
// the protobuf representation is more compact in the way the data is
// structured here (with all the buckets in a single array separate
// from the Spans).
message BucketSpan {
  sint32 offset = 1; // Gap to previous span, or starting point for 1st span (which can be negative).
  uint32 length = 2; // Length of consecutive buckets.
}

// [...]
```

> (TODO: The above does not yet contain the custom values needed for NHCBs. Update

Reviewer 5: Oh nice, so it will be possible to do nhcb on scrape? That's would be nice and somehow along the https://github.com/prometheus/OpenMetrics/issues/283 ideas.

Reviewer 5: Ok, explained in NHCB section, makes sense!

(as the sum field is a float value even in an integer histogram), and the
appropriate version can be used to avoid cutting a new chunk. All version of a
stale marker (float, integer histogram, float histogram) MUST be treated as
equivalent by the TSDB.

### Chunk size limit

The size of float chunks is limited to 1024 bytes. The same size limitation is
generally used for histogram chunks, too. However, individual histograms can
become very large if they have many buckets, so blindly enforcing the size
limit could lead to chunks with very few histograms. (In the most extreme case,
a single histogram could even take more than 1024 bytes so that the size limit
could not be enforced at all.) With very few histograms per chunk, the
compression ratio becomes worse. Therefore, a minimum number of 10 histograms
per chunks has to be reached before the size limit of 1024 bytes kicks in. This
implies that histogram chunks can be much larger than 1024 bytes.

Requiring a minimum of 10 histograms per chunk is an initial, very simplistic
approach, which might be improved in the future to find a better trade-off
between chunk size and compression ratio.

> ### Counter reset considerations

Reviewer 5: This is quite complex. What do you think about switching to Created Timestamp feature for it? Would it simplify it? We will have it for all counters soon.

Author: CT is in itself a new and experimental feature. I wouldn't conflate them.

Even if CT were already established, I don't think it can be relied upon for NH ingestion. We need to detect counter reset as part of the encoding anyway. CT is more an additional source of information: We can mark (and store) a counter reset even if it is not detectable by conventional means, see below.

“reset timestamp”, but the term “created timestamp” is firmly established by
now.)

The created timestamp provides the most recent time the metric was created or
reset. A [design
doc](https://github.com/prometheus/proposals/blob/main/proposals/2023-06-13_created-timestamp.md)
describes how Prometheus handles created timestamps.

Created timestamps are also useful for native histograms. In the same way a
synthetic zero sample is inserted for float counters, a zero value of a
histogram sample is inserted for counter histograms. A zero value of a
histogram has no populated buckets, and the sum of observations, the count of
observations, and the zero bucket population are all zero. Schema, zero bucket
width, custom values, and the float vs. integer flavor of the histogram SHOULD
match the sample that directly follows the synthetic zero sample (to not
trigger the detection of a spurious counter reset).

The counter reset information of the synthetic zero sample is always set to
`CounterReset`. (TODO: Currently, Prometheus probably sets it to
`UnknownCounterReset` for the first sample of a series, which is not wrong, but

> I think setting it to `CounterReset` makes more sense.)

Reviewer 5: Yea, I think we want to switch to native CT handling, not synthetic zeros. So switching counter reset to CT would be one way of doing this, going forward 🤔

Author: See above.

_i_ is an integer number that may be negative.

There are exceptions to the rules above concerning the largest and smallest
finite values representable as a float64 (called `MaxFloat64` and `MinFloat64`
in the following) and the positive and negative infinity values (`+Inf` and
`-Inf`):

- The positive bucket that contains `MaxFloat64` (according to the boundary
  formulas above) has an upper inclusive limit of `MaxFloat64` (rather than the
  limit calculated by the formulas above, which would overflow float64).
- The next positive bucket (index _i_+1 relative to the bucket from the
  previous item) has a lower exclusive limit of `MaxFloat64` and an upper
  inclusive limit of `+Inf`. (It could be called a _positive overflow bucket_.)
- The negative bucket that contains `MinFloat64` (according to the boundary
  formulas above) has a lower inclusive limit of `MinFloat64` (rather than the
  limit calculated by the formulas above, which would underflow float64).
- The next negative bucket (index _i_+1 relative to the bucket from the
  previous item) has an upper exclusive limit of `MinFloat64` and an lower
  inclusive limit of `-Inf`. (It could be called a _negative overflow bucket_.)

> - Buckets beyond the `+Inf` and `-Inf` buckets described above MUST NOT be used.

Reviewer 6: Using the `positive overflow bucket` and `negative overflow bucket` might be more accurate than `+Inf` and `-Inf` buckets?

Author: Those terms are only introduced in parentheses with "they could be called". I'd rather refer to the limits as that's firmly established before. It's also very accurate because the only observed value that will go into the +Inf bucket is, well, +Inf, and likewise for -Inf.

spans define the number of excluded (and thus unpopulated buckets). The lengths
define the number of consecutive buckets in the list following the excluded
buckets.

The sum of all length values in each span list MUST be equal to the length of
the corresponding bucket list.

Empty spans (with a length of zero) are valid and MAY be used, although they
are generally not useful and they SHOULD be eliminated by adding their offset
to the offset of the following span. Similarly, spans that are not the first
span in a list MAY have an offset of zero, although those offsets SHOULD be
eliminated by adding their length to the previous span. Both cases are allowed
so that producers of native histograms MAY pick whatever representation has the
best resource trade-offs at that moment. For example, if a histogram is
processed through various stages, it might be most efficient to only eliminate
redundant spans after the last processing stage.

In a similar spirit, there are situation where excluding every unpopulated
bucket from the bucket list is most efficient, but in other situations, it
might be better to reduce the number of spans by representing small numbers of

> unpopulated buckets explicitly.

Reviewer 6: I don't fully understand here. How could we reduce the number of spans by representing small numbers of unpopulated buckets explicitly? Do you mean combine two successive spans into a new span with some unpopulated buckets in it?

standard schemas above. They are counted in a dedicated bucket called the _zero
bucket_.

The number of observations in the zero bucket is tracked by a single uint64
(for integer histograms) or float64 (for float histograms).

The zero bucket has an additional parameter called the _zero threshold_, which
is a float64 ≥ 0. If the threshold is set to zero, only observations of exactly
zero go into the zero bucket, which is the case described above. If the
threshold has a positive value, all observations within the closed interval
[-threshold, +threshold] go to the zero bucket rather than a regular bucket.
This has two use cases:

- Noisy observations close to zero tend to populate a high number of buckets.
  Those observations might happen due to numerical inaccuracies or if the
  source of the observations are actual physical measurements. A zero bucket
  with a relatively small threshold redirects those observations into a single
  bucket.
- If the user is more interested in the long tail of a distribution, far away
  from zero, a relatively large threshold of the zero bucket helps to avoid
  many high resolution buckets for a range that is not of interest.

> The threshold of the zero bucket SHOULD coincide with a boundary of a regular

Reviewer 6: Do this should be "SHOULD NOT" instead of "SHOULD"? I take "coincide with" as "same or overlapped".
